---
title: "Chapter 2 | Data and Methods"
date: 2020-11-01
published: true
tags: [dataviz, altair, hvplot, holoviews]
excerpt: "How to build an index of urban similarity"
hv-loader:
  hv-chart-1: "charts/fractals.html"
  hv-chart-2: "charts/populations.html"
toc: false
toc_sticky: false
---

The primary goal of this analysis is to understand variations in the experiences of "Downtown America", a qualitative phenomenon that we will attempt to capture with quantitative measures below. The aspects of urban vitality that we need to put numbers on are aspects of built form—how large are the builings and how narrow are the streets?—and natural enviromment–is this area *treed* or *untreed*?—along with how many people are around. Fortunately, we have access to *estimations* of all of these components from free and open sources.

## Measuring urban form

<div id="hv-chart-1"></div>

## Daytime and nighttime activate

The Oak Ridge National Laboratory provides estimates on 100 meter grid cells of population during both day and night times based on remote sensing. Using the squares that we contruct above, we can extract mean, minimum and maximum values per tile. We limit ourselves to these zonal statistics because bringing the data into python as an image is prohibitive: 

<div id="hv-chart-2"></div>

## The natural environment

To capture the role of the natural environment in a city's feel and form, we look at both water and plants using common indices calculated from satellite imagery. Normalized differences are simply the different between two bands divided by the sum of those two bands; the results, depending on the band, can illuminate different aspects of an image, including whether it contains plants—which emit infrared radiation—and whether it contains water. There are not perfect, but areas with much vegetation will tend to have a high normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) and areas with large bodies of water will have a high normalized difference water index (NDWI). 


